---
author: una
description: >
  WIP
lang: en 
layout: pixel
tags: blog programming python lua minecraft computercraft video-processing
title: >
  CC: Tweaked Video Player
---

<pre>
 ______ ______ __    _______                      __             __ 
|      |      |__|  |_     _|--.--.--.-----.---.-|  |--.-----.--|  |
|   ---|   ---|__     |   | |  |  |  |  -__|  _  |    <|  -__|  _  |
|______|______|__|    |___| |________|_____|___._|__|__|_____|_____|
|   |   |__|--|  |-----.-----.    |   __ \  |---.-.--.--.-----.----. 
|   |   |  |  _  |  -__|  _  |    |    __/  |  _  |  |  |  -__|   _| 
 \_____/|__|_____|_____|_____|    |___|  |__|___._|___  |_____|__|   
                                                  |_____|            
</pre>

By Una Ada, February 2025.

- toc
{:toc}

## Prologue

My friends and I have been playing modded Minecraft once again. Specifically, we've been playing [ATM10][1], which has a modern port of the classic [ComputerCraft][2] mod called [CC: Tweaked][3]. As I was messing around with the computers as they are now, as opposed to the last time I really looked into ComputerCraft circa 2015, I came across a section in the documentation that specifically described the means by which one might play arbitrary audio. This was fun to play around with, we had previously played the [BounceSMP][4] pack which had the [Etched][5] mod to allow audio streaming so it was nice to be able to emulate that functionality again. Of course, this inevitably brought about viscious thoughts of the scope creep variety: what about video?

Obviously I'm not the first person to wonder if this is possible, I searched around and found a few reasonable options. The first I really tried was [QTCCV][6] by [Axisok][7]. It is interesting, aiming to store the video on the computer without circumventing its storage limits, but it does have extreme limitations on color and the compression took really long to run when I tried. Not to mention its further limitation of using [Wave][8] for audio and thus requiring [Note Block Studio][9] `.nbs` files to play the CC equivalent of MIDI rather than arbitrary `.dfpwm` 8-bit audio. [ComputerCraftTV][10] seemed like it might be better for what I wanted, but there's ZERO documentation there. Ultimately, I went with [Edde746][11]'s [cc-video-player][12] which functioned more or less as expected.

I'm more than glad to have this to work from as a good basis, but that's the thing, a basis. See, it wasn't without its problems when I first tested it out. 

First, the audio conversion code was throwing some errors or something. I didn't want to deal with this so I just commented it all out and used the [ComputerCraft Music Converter][22] website on the audio tracks instead. This isn't too hard using [ffmpeg][23]:

```shell
ffmpeg -i input.mp4 -vn -acodec copy output.mp3
```

I'll figure out how to re-implement audio eventually. Turns out the issue was happening because some missing requirements, `soundfile` and `pydub` I believe. Adding those back in didn't fix it because the DFPWM converter was then throwing another math related error and I honestly don't know how to fix that so maybe I'll try to use the DFPWMa1 codec [built into more modern versions of libavcodec][24] and therefore ffmpeg? I put this off because updating ffmpeg kept throwing errors with Homebrew so... anyway.

This next issue annoyed me a tad bit. See, I kept [setting the monitor text scale][25] to `0.5` to maximize the resolution, but when I played the video I encoded with the [hypothetical resolution][26] it only showed the top left quarter. I even added the `monitor.setTextScale(0.5)`{:.language-lua} line INTO `player.lua` and it didn't work... until I saw line 38: `monitor.setTextScale(1)`{:.language-lua}. What the hell man? Anyway that was an easy fix, I guess.

Now this other issue is pretty common across CC scripts I've seen. There is no built in method for getting a relative path, so they all just kind of assume everything is running in the computer's root directory. This isn't great when you want to load things onto disks and such, so I've come up with a clever little way to make relative paths possible:

```lua
local path = fs.getDir(shell.getRunningProgram())
local videoFile = fs.combine(path, "video.nfv")
local audioFile = fs.combine(path, "audio.dfpwm")
```

Next, `nfp.py`, a script to convert the frames to CC's NFP file format written by [DownrightNifty][13]; this uses the [Pillow][14] library to quantize the image, but it only quantizes the image in the most basic manner. Anyone who knows me knows I love dithering. The script's calls to Pillow are like this:

```python
def img_to_nfp(im, new_size=None, dither=0):
  # ...
  im = _quantize_with_colors(im, CC_COLORS, dither)
# ...
def _quantize_with_colors(image, colors, dither=0):
  # ...
  return image.quantize(palette=pal_im,dither=dither)
```

You'll note that `dither=0`{:.language-python} there which per [Pillow's source code][15] is the enumeration for `PIL.Image.Dither.NONE`{:.language-python}. That's just sad! I also don't like using integer values for enum constants like this, though it would make sense for something like the main script which doesn't import `PIL`. Anyway, I just changed the default to [the only other available dither mode][16] `PIL.Image.Dither.FLOYDSTEINBERG`. This is a temporary patch. I'll probably get sick of Floyd-Steinberg dithering and switch to a whole new image processor or simply implement my own pattern dithering like I did [last time][17]. This was commit [01deea3][18] on my fork... I did fork the repository like a good kitty... after realizing I was making too many edits to not keep track of them.

Next issue! The video kept desyncing from the audio. This one was a pretty obvious issue once I looked at `player.lua`:

```lua
function nextFrame()
  -- ...
  paintutils.drawImage(frame, 1, 1)
  os.sleep(1 / fps)
  return true
end
```

This is a classic case of not compensating for the time it takes to draw the frame when calculating framerate. Fixing it should be easy, just count the time it took to draw and subtract that from wait time.

```lua
function nextFrame()
  local start = os.epoch()
  -- ...
  paintutils.drawImage(frame, 1, 1)
  local comp = os.epoch() - start
  os.sleep((1 / fps) - comp)
  return true
end
```

... Or so I thought, it was running way too quickly when I added this, the video was way ahead of the audio. So I tried printing out that compensation time and it was a MASSIVE number. Weird, right? Turns out the default locale for `os.epoch()` is `ingame`, which has this whole explanation in the [documentation][19]:

> The ingame time zone assumes that one Minecraft day consists of 86,400,000 
> milliseconds. Since one in-game day is much faster than a real day (20 
> minutes), this will change quicker than real time - one real second is equal 
> to 72000 in-game milliseconds. If you wish to convert this value to real 
> time, divide by 72000; to convert to ticks (where a day is 24000 ticks), 
> divide by 3600.

Which seemed to be a lot to read at the time so I just switched the locale to `utc` which was probably a bad idea:

```lua
local comp = os.epoch("utc") - start
```

Even with using milliseconds from the real world which is what `os.sleep()` wants, it was still just a bit slow. Turns out, per the [docs][20], `os.sleep()` rounds the wait time to the nearest tick (0.05s). Evidently this was causing weird timing issues, so I just had to round it to ticks myself:

```lua
local comp = math.ceil((os.epoch("utc") - start)/50)/20
```

Which finally sorted out that whole issue. Check commit [420bfc6][21].

[1]: https://www.curseforge.com/minecraft/modpacks/all-the-mods-10
[2]: https://www.curseforge.com/minecraft/mc-mods/computercraft
[3]: https://tweaked.cc/
[4]: https://www.curseforge.com/minecraft/modpacks/bouncesmp-public
[5]: https://www.curseforge.com/minecraft/mc-mods/etched
[6]: https://github.com/Axisok/qtccv
[7]: https://github.com/Axisok/
[8]: https://github.com/CrazedProgrammer/wave
[9]: https://opennbs.org/
[10]: https://github.com/jonko0493/ComputerCraftTV
[11]: https://github.com/edde746/
[12]: https://github.com/edde746/cc-video-player
[13]: https://github.com/DownrightNifty/computercraft-stuff
[14]: https://python-pillow.org/
[15]: https://pillow.readthedocs.io/en/stable/_modules/PIL/Image.html#Dither
[16]: https://pillow.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference/Image.html#dither-modes
[17]: https://猫.dev/js/2/dither
[18]: https://github.com/una-ada/cc-video-player/commit/01deea3
[19]: https://tweaked.cc/module/os.html#v:epoch
[20]: https://tweaked.cc/module/os.html#v:sleep
[21]: https://github.com/una-ada/cc-video-player/commit/420bfc6
[22]: https://music.madefor.cc/
[23]: https://www.ffmpeg.org/
[24]: https://patchwork.ffmpeg.org/project/ffmpeg/patch/43daccc7-c618-993e-912d-54e633e8c7f2@gmail.com/
[25]: https://tweaked.cc/peripheral/monitor.html#v:setTextScale
[26]: https://tweaked.cc/peripheral/monitor.html#v:getSize

## Ideals

So, that's everything I've done. I managed to get the Puella Magi Madoka Magica NCOP to play at a crisp 4fps in like 140x80 resolution or something. It works, right? Well, at some point early on my wife more or less egged me on to go bigger. She wanted me to play the entirety of The Melancholy of Haruhi Suzumiya, both 2006 and 2009 plus the movie. Given that the 90 second opening of MadoMagi is already pushing the limits of what CC will load as a single file at 4fps (trust me, I tried higher framerates), something else is going to need to be done for that to be possible.

Thus, let me lay down my ideal way for this to work. Pie in the sky, computer just runs one command and you can play existing video files, possibly from a server via transcoding. 

More grounded, something like a GUI on the computer, letting you select files, then possibly streaming already encoded chunks. Given that the audio has a 2.7s max for its chunks, see [this tutorial][27] for discussion of that, perhaps we only need to buffer 2.7s of VIDEO as well. This could be done on a separate server to make this feasible to do without access to the world file. Side note, I've been dumping everything I've made directly onto the computers and disks on our Minecraft server because I'm the administrator so I can access the `world/computercraft` folder and do that, this isn't reasonable for everyone.

Furthermore, I'd like to increase resolution beyond just one multiblock monitor. These things could be tiled, connected with network cables, and have video streamed to each in some manner. Alternatively, each monitor can have its own computer running it, then some main computer sends the data to each one... that is if async code is impossible, which would make this totally necessary. This would also increase filesizes further despite splitting up the resolution across several computers as each frame will likely require some timing data. I'll have to do more research on how video streaming is usually handled, tbh.

[27]: https://tweaked.cc/guide/speaker_audio.html

## Updating FFmpeg

Okay, look, I mentioned it earlier but for the audio stuff I want to use a more updated version of FFmpeg than I currently have. I have version 5.0.1_3 and I want to update to 7.1_4. I thought this would be an easy:

```bash
brew update & brew upgrade ffmpeg
```

But that didn't happen, one of the dependencies, `libsodium` can't seem to download from its server.

```log
curl: (35) error:1400442E:SSL routines:CONNECT_CR_SRVR_HELLO:tlsv1 alert protocol version
Error: ffmpeg: Failed to download resource "libsodium"
Download failed: https://download.libsodium.org/libsodium/releases/libsodium-1.0.20.tar.gz
```

Why does Homebrew work like this? I tried some time later and it was still a no go. So I searched around for alternative ways to deal with this and apparently there's like a "3rd party repository" method which looks like this: 

```bash
brew tap homebrew-ffmpeg/ffmpeg
brew install homebrew-ffmpeg/ffmpeg/ffmpeg
```

This doesn't have the same issue, it has something new. 

```log
Run-time dependency python found: NO (tried pkgconfig, pkgconfig and sysconfig)
meson.build:184:50: ERROR: Python dependency not found
```

I was like, "what the fuck do you mean Python dependency not found!" I tried searching around about this, apaprently it happens quite a bit with Meson, whatever that is. [Someone][30] even said that this means you installed Python incorrectly and, like, no? I mean they were talking about Linux but if a executable and its dependencies are on your computer and in the PATH then they're installed correctly! Fuck you! If I can type `python` into my terminal and a Python terminal opens up then it's correct. I have so many versions of Python installed, free me.

Anyway, I tried forcing it to look at the existing Python versions by running the upgrade in a Python environment thingy like so:

```bash
python3 -m venv ~/venv
source ~/venv/bin/activate
brew install homebrew-ffmpeg/ffmpeg/ffmpeg
```

Then I tabbed out to watch Foundation for a few hours, started writing this blog, ate some potato my wife cooked for me while adding a new version of [Prism.js][28] to this website to support Lua... look, when I initially added Prism I thought "huh, Lua? I'll probably never touch the stuff again, let alone write about it." Yet, here we are. Anyway, I finally went back to my terminal and the same fucking error was there so, uhh. What the hell is Meson anyway?

Okay, okay, I know from all the Linux discussions that what I need is SOMETHING that adds the header files for Python so that Meson can find it. All the ones I've seen discussed are either outdated or platform dependent. And, well, it does say something about trying `pkgconfig` so maybe that'll do it. [This comment][29] on a similar issue seems to imply so.

Ugh, I tried `brew install pkgconf` but it told me that's already installed! And up to date! I tried `sysconfig` but that isn't even a package! Okay, what else can we try? Pointing Meson to the Python binary? I think that's something like this:

```bash
meson configure --python.install-env system
```

That WOULD do something if I was in the directory it was trying to build from/to apparently? I dunno, nothing is working... maybe try to find a Python header thingy for Mac? Let's try, uhhh, `python-packaging`. That didn't work.

Okay, new perspective. This error is happening when installing [glib][31], but from the looks of it, it's building from source otherwise it wouldn't even NEED Meson at all. So, let's try to install it not from source? I don't know how to do that, so I just ran `brew install glib`. I'm going to be so pissed when this doesn't work because I can see from the terminal title that it's running Python in between Ruby and Clang and Bash... what the fuck? 

Alright, somewhere said I should use the `packaging` library... didn't I just... well just in case let's `pip install packaging`{:.language-bash} and `pip3 install packaging`{:.language-bash}... oh `pip3`{:.language-bash} says the environment is managed by `brew` so I totally did just... okay `brew install pipx`{:.language-bash} and then `pipx install packaging`{:.language-bash}. Okay `pipx` said I should use `pip` so let's just `pip install packaging`{:.language-bash} again for good measure. I'll admit it isn't surprising that this didn't work.

[Seemingly][32], the library that installed Meson seems to affect this sort of thing. So, install Meson again? Gotta `brew reinstall meson`{:.language-bash} and hope that does it... It did not. Let's pull out the BIG GUNS: `brew install glib --HEAD`{:.language-bash}!!! Which gave me a uhhh "No head is defined for glib" which is weird because the website says like 150 people have done that recently :/ I'd say I'd check the logs to really dig into this but Homebrew deletes the logs when it finishes... thus the moment it throws an error... unless there's logs somewhere else?

Fuck it, nuclear option.

```bash
brew rm ffmpeg
brew install homebrew-ffmpeg/ffmpeg/ffmpeg
```

Admittedly this isn't that nuclear at this point given that somewhere along the way I'd already broken my existing FFmpeg install. Lol, this is fun. I actually kept slapping a `brew rm` onto everything in sight until I felt satisfied... not because just removing the dependencies in front of me didn't work or anything. Anyway, how do you even reinstall Python? I AM NOT PROCRASTINATING, I NEED FFMPEG TO DO THIS. Fuck this, I'm going to bed.

Day 10 of updating FFmpeg. Shouldn't I just install it without Homebrew at this point? Downloading a [static build][33], move it somewhere reasonable, add it to PATH, etc:

```bash
md ~/Library/FFmpeg
cd Downloads
mv ffmpeg ~/Library/FFmpeg
# You can ignore these next two, I accidentally yeeted my user config
cp ~/.oh-my-zsh/templates/zshrc.zsh-template ~/.zshrc
compaudit | xargs chmod g-w,o-w
echo "export PATH=\".:/Users/$USER/Library/FFmpeg:\$PATH\"" >> ~/.zshrc
# Fix xattr, see https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-cask/issues/69660
sudo python -m ensurepip --default-pip
sudo python -m pip install --upgrade pip setuptools wheel
sudo python -m pip install --upgrade xattr==0.6.4
# Remove binary from quarantine, see https://evermeet.cx/ffmpeg/#remarks
xattr -d com.apple.quarantine ~/Library/FFmpeg/ffmpeg
ffmpeg -version
```

Can I get a "That was easy!" in chat? Sure I fucked up my OhMyZSH config along the way, I think there was an alias in there somewhere. And I had to search for [solutions][34] to the `xattr` error that was being thrown when trying to remove FFmpeg from quarantine... also the [Remarks section][35] for that FFmpeg release says to use `xattr -dr` which also threw an error so I changed it to `xattr -d` which seems to work fine. Why didn't I just do that from the start? I never really liked Homebrew anyway.

[28]: https://prismjs.com/
[29]: https://github.com/mesonbuild/meson/issues/12547#issuecomment-1826420665
[30]: https://gitlab.com/mauricemolli/petitRADTRANS/-/issues/90#note_2177228201
[31]: https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/glib
[32]: https://github.com/mesonbuild/meson/issues/12729#issuecomment-2078088401
[33]: https://evermeet.cx/ffmpeg/
[34]: https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-cask/issues/69660#issuecomment-535778324
[35]: https://evermeet.cx/ffmpeg/#remarks

## Updating Audio Conversion

Now that FFmpeg is updated, I should theoretically be able to re-implement the DFPWM conversion with a simple call to the python-ffmpeg library. If I could even get the script to run in the first place, but suddenly I'm having issues reinstalling the dependencies:

```bash
pip3 install r -requirements.txt
```

